src/content/posts/html-sanitization/index.md, before:

---
date: 2025-09-05T08:13:44Z
draft: false
title: "HTML Sanitization: Avoiding The Double-Encoding Issue"
image: "sanitization.png"
keywords:
  - HTML Sanitization
  - XSS
  - Cross-Site Scripting
  - Double Encoding
  - Double Escaping
  - React
  - Next.js
  - NestJS
  - Web Security
  - Sanitize on Ingest
  - Sanitize on Output
  - Unicode
  - Character Entities
  - Data Transformation
  - System Architecture
  - Security Audit
---

Once upon a time, I went through another security audit on a project that wasn't
particularly old but had passed through the hands of several teams. After the
first round of penetration testing, the auditing team found a lack of data
sanitization on the backend side.

With proof. Quite disappointing.

![data processing pipe](sanitization.png)

## Related Internals

As a result, security auditing team presented us with demands:

1. Sanitize all data coming from client to server on server side;
   - _Sanitize on Ingest_: A "defense in depth" strategy. Never trust user input
     and clean it before it even touches your database. Classic security
     requirement.

2. Sanitize all data coming from server to client on client side;
   - _Sanitize on Output_: The modern web development approach --- sanitize data
     for the specific context it's being used in (e.g., HTML, CSS, a URL) at the
     last possible moment. This is considered the most effective way to prevent
     XSS.

Our tech stack was a fairly standard setup: a few microservices built with
NestJS and a Next.js frontend. And _Sanitize on Output_ is a standard security
practice in React (which powers Next.js); it already protects against HTML
injection by default by sanitizing all rendered output. Disabling this is a
major anti-pattern.

## The Issue

It wasn't a big deal to implement sanitization on the server side, so I did it
and started storing strings with `&amp;` instead of the literal character `&` in
the database. However, this created a classic double-escaping problem. Because
React also escapes output, the `&amp;` I was carefully storing in the database
was rendered literally on the screen as `&amp;`. The browser never turned it
back into an `&`.

Every online guide and AI assistant suggested the same thing: "Only sanitize on
output"! But I couldn't do that; the security team's requirement to sanitize on
ingest was non-negotiable.

And the interesting idea landed in my head: Why, in **2025**, we are still using
[character entities](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_XML_and_HTML_character_entity_references)
instead of _raw Unicode characters_?

For simplicity, I'll provide a list for comparison (not all of them have to be
used):

| Character entity | Unicode symbol |
| :--------------- | :------------- |
| `&hellip;`       | `…`            |
| `&mdash;`        | `—`            |
| `&ndash;`        | `–`            |
| `&laquo;`        | `«`            |
| `&ldquo;`        | `“`            |
| `&lsquo;`        | `‘`            |
| `&raquo;`        | `»`            |
| `&rdquo;`        | `”`            |
| `&rsquo;`        | `’`            |
| `&amp;`          | `＆`           |
| `&lt;`           | `＜`           |
| `&gt;`           | `＞`           |

The goal was reached --- the database now contained only _safe_ symbols, and the
UI represented them nicely. But at what price, you may ask?

**Fun fact**: Single UTF symbol requires less space compared with 3+ ASCII
symbols in utf encoding.

## Trade-offs and Considerations

- First, legacy systems: If you're still using KOI8-R and similar, this isn't
  for you (legacy email clients, for example). Resign yourself to it.
- This approach has to work consistently across the entire backend.
  - Any tech decision has to work consistently, isn't it?
- Database content isn't pure user input, but is it a real problem?
  - You'll need to migrate old data, ✅
  - I have to write
    `SELECT * FROM somewhere WHERE data = "some data＆another data"`, which
    could be an issue only for analytical purposes 🤔
    - Anyway, I'll set up a custom tokenizer in Typesense/Elasticsearch.
  - But it's already prepared to be exported into CSV without additional
    escaping (as a joke).
- I'm not a mobile dev, and we don't have mobile apps yet --- we'll see (just
  use proper encoding and modern fonts, not from the dinosaur era 🤷).
- Probably the most underrated point: This process is more like _data
  transformation_ than _sanitization_.

## Conclusion

So, is this an ugly hack or an elegant solution?

I would count it as an elegant trade-off. In a perfect world, we would only
sanitize on output. But we don't operate in a perfect world; (un)fortunately we
operate with real-world constraints.

Commit message:

add warning into html encoding article

src/content/posts/html-sanitization/index.md, after:

---
date: 2025-09-05T08:13:44Z
draft: false
title: "HTML Sanitization: Avoiding The Double-Encoding Issue"
image: "sanitization.png"
keywords:
  - HTML Sanitization
  - XSS
  - Cross-Site Scripting
  - Double Encoding
  - Double Escaping
  - React
  - Next.js
  - NestJS
  - Web Security
  - Sanitize on Ingest
  - Sanitize on Output
  - Unicode
  - Character Entities
  - Data Transformation
  - System Architecture
  - Security Audit
---

Once upon a time, I went through another security audit on a project that wasn't
particularly old but had passed through the hands of several teams. After the
first round of penetration testing, the auditing team found a lack of data
sanitization on the backend side.

With proof. Quite disappointing.

![data processing pipe](sanitization.png)

> **Warning:** This article is NOT a recommendation to abandon standard HTML
> entity encoding. This method should only be considered by those who fully
> understand the security implications and are facing the exact double-encoding
> problem described here.

## Related Internals

As a result, security auditing team presented us with demands:

1. Sanitize all data coming from client to server on server side;
   - _Sanitize on Ingest_: A "defense in depth" strategy. Never trust user input
     and clean it before it even touches your database. Classic security
     requirement.

2. Sanitize all data coming from server to client on client side;
   - _Sanitize on Output_: The modern web development approach --- sanitize data
     for the specific context it's being used in (e.g., HTML, CSS, a URL) at the
     last possible moment. This is considered the most effective way to prevent
     XSS.

Our tech stack was a fairly standard setup: a few microservices built with
NestJS and a Next.js frontend. And _Sanitize on Output_ is a standard security
practice in React (which powers Next.js); it already protects against HTML
injection by default by sanitizing all rendered output. Disabling this is a
major anti-pattern.

## The Issue

It wasn't a big deal to implement sanitization on the server side, so I did it
and started storing strings with `&amp;` instead of the literal character `&` in
the database. However, this created a classic double-escaping problem. Because
React also escapes output, the `&amp;` I was carefully storing in the database
was rendered literally on the screen as `&amp;`. The browser never turned it
back into an `&`.

Every online guide and AI assistant suggested the same thing: "Only sanitize on
output"! But I couldn't do that; the security team's requirement to sanitize on
ingest was non-negotiable.

And the interesting idea landed in my head: Why, in **2025**, we are still using
[character entities](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_XML_and_HTML_character_entity_references)
instead of _raw Unicode characters_?

For simplicity, I'll provide a list for comparison (not all of them have to be
used):

| Character entity | Unicode symbol | Security critical |
| :--------------- | :------------- | :---------------: |
| `&hellip;`       | `…`            |                   |
| `&mdash;`        | `—`            |                   |
| `&ndash;`        | `–`            |                   |
| `&laquo;`        | `«`            |                   |
| `&ldquo;`        | `“`            |                   |
| `&lsquo;`        | `‘`            |                   |
| `&raquo;`        | `»`            |                   |
| `&rdquo;`        | `”`            |                   |
| `&rsquo;`        | `’`            |                   |
| `&amp;`          | `＆`           |        ✅         |
| `&lt;`           | `＜`           |        ✅         |
| `&gt;`           | `＞`           |        ✅         |

The goal was reached --- the database now contained only _safe_ symbols, and the
UI represented them nicely. But at what price, you may ask?

**Fun fact**: Single UTF symbol requires less space compared with 3+ ASCII
symbols in utf encoding.

## Trade-offs and Considerations

- First, legacy systems: If you're still using KOI8-R and similar, this isn't
  for you (legacy email clients, for example). Resign yourself to it.
- This approach has to work consistently across the entire backend.
  - Any tech decision has to work consistently, isn't it?
- Database content isn't pure user input, but is it a real problem?
  - You'll need to migrate old data, ✅
  - I have to write
    `SELECT * FROM somewhere WHERE data = "some data＆another data"`, which
    could be an issue only for analytical purposes 🤔
    - Anyway, I'll set up a custom tokenizer in Typesense/Elasticsearch.
  - But it's already prepared to be exported into CSV without additional
    escaping (as a joke).
- I'm not a mobile dev, and we don't have mobile apps yet --- we'll see (just
  use proper encoding and modern fonts, not from the dinosaur era 🤷).
- Probably the most underrated point: This process is more like _data
  transformation_ than _sanitization_.

## Conclusion

So, is this an ugly hack or an elegant solution?

I would count it as an elegant trade-off. In a perfect world, we would only
sanitize on output. But we don't operate in a perfect world; (un)fortunately we
operate with real-world constraints.
